Our theme does not end in the form of a question.
Rather, it is a statement of fact.
We can rejoice despite danger.
Please follow along as we look to the example that the Apostle Paul said.
He was able to rejoice despite danger,
and he faced many dangers in his ministry.
In one verse, he mentions eight different types of dangers he faced,
including dangers from robbers.
While in Ephesus, Paul may even have been exposed to wild beasts in an arena.
Please turn with me to 2 Corinthians chapter 1.
We'll read verses 8 through 11.
And notice what it says.
For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the tribulation we experienced in the province of Asia.
He wrote this while he was in Europe, Macedonia.
He continues,
we were under extreme pressure beyond our own strength,
so that we were very uncertain even of our lives.
In fact, we felt that we had received the sentence of death.
This was so that we would trust not in ourselves,
but in the God who raises up the dead.
From such a great risk of death, he did rescue us and will rescue us,
and our hope is in him that he will also continue to rescue us.
You also can help us by your supplication for us,
in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers of many.
Less than a year earlier, he had written his first letter to the Corinthians.
This time he was in Asia, the city of Ephesus.
In the 15th chapter of that letter, verse 32,
he says,
If, like other men, I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, of what good is it to me?
His comments would fit an experience with literal wild beasts in the arena.
But Paul's hope in the resurrection strengthened him.
As he said,
This was so that we would trust not in ourselves,
but in the God who raises up the dead.
He was also encouraged in strengthened by fellow Christians.
He said,
You also can help us by your supplication for us,
in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers of many.
In the congregation,
we also enjoy a warm brotherhood which provides assistance and support in numerous ways.
At one point in his ministry,
Paul and his traveling companions felt extreme pressure,
and were uncertain even of their lives.
Where did Paul find support and relief?
He was encouraged and consoled by fellow Christians who came to his aid.
When natural disasters or other calamities strike time and again,
our Christian brothers are the first on the scene to render needed assistance materially
and spiritually to fellow Christians as well as to others in need.
Today, Christians are not exposed to wild beasts and arenas.
However, like Paul,
we can rejoice despite danger that we may face.
Any of us can face dangers from robbers or the threat of physical assault,
especially in times of civil unrest.
The Bible foretold that in these last days, people would be fierce without love of goodness.
As you watch the following video,
note which provisions helped one family to rejoice despite such dangers.
I was born in Caracas and live in an area of the city called Patari.
In Patari, I have to live with violence and delinquency.
A few years ago, we lost a pioneer sister who sadly was hit by a bullet.
Well, something like that also happened to my son.
There was a confrontation in the neighborhood and a stray bullet hit my son and killed him instantly.
That left such a void.
It hurt me to go into his room and see his empty bed,
and then to see his things, his shoes, his favorite clothes,
see them in the wardrobe, crying was inevitable.
But these situations were very difficult to deal with at the time.
But as soon as the congregation found out about the situation,
right away they gave me support.
They were there to help care for all the things you need to do when you lose a loved one.
After going through all that, I was very afraid to continue going out in field service.
I feared for my life and for the life of my family.
I prayed to Jehovah and Jehovah gave me practical wisdom to continue.
Sometimes when I'm alone meditating and thinking about my son,
those memories return and of course I have a setback for so to speak.
And I begin to cry again.
But keeping clearly in mind the promise of the resurrection
is what motivates me to keep going.
An account that I really like and that I always keep in mind is the account about Lazarus.
Their Martha uses an expression, she says,
I know he will rise on the last day.
And there's the same confidence that I have in Jehovah.
I know that my son will rise.
Jehovah will give him to me.
At the time that this terrible thing happened.
It's true I lost my joy for a time.
But later, after the morning passes, the resurrection hope gives us joy.
It is if Jehovah speaks to me saying, keep calm.
It is if he gives me a gentle pat, telling me to keep going.
And that's what will happen to you.
Keep faithful and continue loyal.
And I will give him back to you.
Did you notice what helped this family to rejoice despite danger?
Prayer?
Their hope in the resurrection?
The support of brotherhood.
And of course, Jehovah's spirit.
Which provisions from Jehovah are helping you to rejoice?
Despite the dangers you may have to face.
Is it your relationship with Jehovah?
The brotherhood?
Our hope?
Or something else?
In these last days with critical times, hard to deal with.
We're being admonished to rejoice in the hope of deliverance from danger.
We long for the end of this wicked system.
Justice Habakkuk long for relief from wickedness in his day.
Let's look at Habakkuk chapter 1.
Feel the stress that he felt as a result of the violence, quarreling,
and oppression that surrounded him.
He asks, how long old Jehovah?
How long must I ask for help from violence?
Why do you make me witness wrongdoing?
Why do you tolerate oppression?
Why are destruction and violence before me?
Why do quarreling and conflict about?
Why?
How long?
But note what he recorded in chapter 2, verse 3.
For the vision is yet for its appointed time.
And it is rushing toward its end.
And it will not lie.
Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it.
For it will, without fail come true, it will not be late.
Like Habakkuk, we trust in Jehovah,
and have the assurance that he will soon end violence.
Habakkuk took the initiative to draw close to Jehovah,
his trusted friend and father.
He did not just fret over his situation,
relying on his own understanding.
Instead, he prayed about his feelings and worries.
That's a good example for us.
Notice his resolve in chapter 3 and verse 18.
There he says,
As for me, I will exalt in Jehovah.
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.
Today, Jehovah, the hear of prayer, invites us to show our trust
by prayerfully sharing our concerns with him.
Jehovah didn't approve Habakkuk for expressing his anxieties.
He had them recorded, likely to show that it's only natural for us
to have such feelings at times.
But Jehovah wants us to call out to him.
Doing so will help us to experience Jehovah's response,
his warm embrace by means of his kind guidance.
He will help us to know his thoughts, no matter what afflicts us.
Our heart for a prayer is one of the deepest expressions
of our trust in God.
We rejoice in knowing that Jehovah is eager to deliver us
from all forms of danger.
Brother David Schaefer, a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present the final talk of this symposium.
We can rejoice despite sword.